**Labelled WRF model output**

The datast available here has been produced manually labelling the WRF model output produced by the Center for Marine and atmosphere Monitoring and Modelling Applications (CCMMMA, meteo@uniparthenope, http://meteo.uniparthenope.it) run by the University of Naples "Parthenope".

The weather patterns have been labelled mainly by Gaetano Genovese advised by Vincenzo Capozzi during the research work finalised to obtain his MSC using the Weather Lebelling Web Application (WLWA, https://github.com/CCMMMA/Weather-Labeling-Web-Application).

WLWA has been designed by Raffaele Montella (https://github.com/raffmont) and implemented by Rosario Riccio (https://github.com/rosario-riccio) as his Computer Science BSC final work thesis.

**Labelled Weather Events**

The dataset has been labelled with the aim of challenging scholars in weather sciences and computer science in developing new AI based methodologies for automatic weather pattern, detection, classification in order to improve numerical weather predictions and similar applications.

* 05-09/11/2011:
In the period from 06 to 09 November, the central and western Mediterranean basins were affected by a Mediterranean Tropical-Like Cyclone (TLC), named Rolf. On November 05, the synoptic environment was conditioned by an extensive trough, forced by a relevant oscillation of polar front on Western Europe sectors. The TLC started from the alignment of this upper level trough and a surface low-pressure system near the Balcanic islands. The system reveals the first tropical features on Nov. 07, when it exhibited a warm core and relevant convective bands within a quasi-symmetric structure. Rolf reached the maximum intensity on Nov. 08, when sea level pressure dropped to 990 hPa and maximum 1-min sustained winds up to 82 km/h were observed. On Nov. 09, there was a gradual weakening of the system, which experienced a progressive transition to extra-tropical cyclone after making landfall in the Southeast France. 

* 12-15/04/2012:
In the middle of April 2012, a low-pressure system affected the western and central Mediterranean basins, causing heavy precipitation events in Italian peninsula. The low-pressure are developed in response to an oscillation of polar front, which caused an advection of cold polar air masses on western Mediterranean area. On Apr. 12, a surface low-pressure system developed in Algerian territory and moved northeasterly towards the strait of Sicily. Crossing the Tyrrhenian Sea, the cyclone exhibited the features of a TLC, such as the warm core at mid-tropospheric levels and the alignment between the surface and upper lows. After making landfall on Italian Peninsula, the system weakened and became a warm core seclusion. It is important highlighting that this storm, named Lucia, was the first TLC occurred in Mediterranean area in the spring season.  

* 05-09/11/2014:
On Nov. 05, 2014, a very elongated trough extended from northern Europe to northern sector of Algeria, bringing cold air in western Mediterranean basin. At surface levels, a cyclonic circulation developed across central and western Mediterranean, whereas the eastern sectors were affected by a high-pressure system. In the subsequent day (Nov. 06), the frontal systems (cold and warm fronts) associated to the cyclonic area reinforced due to the incoming of warmer and moist air masses from North Africa. The low-pressure area moved towards the Sicily Strait, where, in the morning of Nov. 07 rapidly deepened, evolving in a TLC with spiral rain bands and cloudless eye-like center. From synoptic point of view, the transition to a tropical structure is well represented by the alignment of upper level Potential Vorticity (PV) trough and low-level cyclone, which strengthened the PV transfer from above and the instability in the low-levels. The TLC, named Quendresa, made landfall at Malta during the afternoon of Nov. 07 and then moved northeastwards, losing the TLP appearance on 12:00 UTC of Nov. 08.

* 27-30/10/2018:
At the end of October 2018, a deep trough affected the Western Europe elongating from Scandinavia to the Iberian Peninsula. In response to the upper-level disturbance, that forces a cold air outbreak, a surface cyclone took place over the western side of Mediterranean. During 27 and 28 October, the trough extended over the northern sector of Africa and triggered an intense, moist and warm meridional flow that interacted with the Italian orography. Because of this synoptic set-up, large amount of rainfall were observed near Apennine Mountains and in central and eastern Alps. A second relevant rainfall event took place on Oct. 29, when the cold front associated to the cyclone entered in the Mediterranean basin. The sharp contrast between different air masses produced an intensification of low-level cyclone (up to 985 hPa), which result in the formation of intense convective systems.   


* 26-30/11/2018:
At the end of September 2018, a TLC system, named Zorbas, affected the central and eastern Mediterranean basins, generating intense rainfall events over the Gulf of Sirte and Greece. The synoptic scenario that forced the genesis of Zorbas was characterized by a strong anticyclonic area over western and Central Europe and by a trough over Russia and Balkan Peninsula, associated to a high level of PV. On 27 Sept, a cut-off developed across Ionian Sea and a cyclogenesis occurred in the Gulf of Sirte. Initially, the cyclone has a classical cold-core structure; subsequently, moving on the very warm Mediterranean Sea, it rapidly intensified due to intense diabatic processes, experiencing a gradual transition to a warm core structure. The maximum intensity (987 hPa) was observed at 00 UTC of Sept. 28. Zorbas made landfall in the morning hours of Sept. 29 in Greece and definitively lost tropical features on Oct. 01. 

* 10-14/11/2019:
On Nov. 10, 2019, an upper-level trough, extended from northern Europe to western Mediterranean basins, generated a surface cyclonic area between Balearic Islands and Sardinia. A ridge, located over eastern Mediterranean sectors, obstructed the natural eastward movement of the low-pressure system. On Nov. 11, the trough evolved into a cut-off and a strong convective activity took place within the low-pressure area, which translated towards the northern Africa. The system, at the end of Nov. 11, showed a morphology typical of a TLC, exhibiting a warm core and a well-defined “eye”, as well as a relevant convective band. However, in the early morning of Nov. 12, it lose, at least in part, the tropical features and it was declassed to a warm core seclusion. Subsequently, the low-pressure area get in phase with a new trough, elongating from northern Europe to central Mediterranean basins, and caused on Nov. 13 and 14 relevant precipitation events over Italian peninsula, Balkans and Austria.  

* 15-20/09/2020:
On 16 Sept. 2020, the synoptic scenario of central Mediterranean area was modulated by a cut-off, clearly recognizable from the analysis of mid and upper troposphere meteorological fields. The cut-off was associated to a surface low-pressure area, located over the Gulf of Sirte. At this stage, the cyclonic area has a pronounced tilting and, therefore, it was not already classifiable as TLC. The alignment between low and upper-level lows occurred on Sept. 17, when the vortex exhibited the classical shape of a TLC, which was named Ianos. The intensification of the cyclone can be primarily ascribed to an upper level intrusion of dry stratospheric air at upper level. Ianos made landfall on western coastal sectors of Greece on 00 UTC of Sept. 18, when at its center the air pressure dropped to 990 hPa. Subsequently, the cyclonic system lost energy and evolved into an extratropical system.  
